# Enabling and Using Hibernate Query Cache

Hibernate provides a powerful query cache mechanism that allows you to cache the results of queries, reducing database load and improving application performance. This is especially useful for queries that are executed frequently and return data that does not change often.

## 1. What is Query Cache?

The query cache stores the results of a query, including the identifiers of the entities returned. When the same query is executed again, Hibernate can return the cached results instead of hitting the database. Note that the query cache works in conjunction with the second-level cache, which stores the actual entity data.

## 2. Enabling Query Cache

### a. Enable Second-Level Cache

First, ensure that the second-level cache is enabled in your `hibernate.cfg.xml` or `application.properties`:

```xml
<property name="hibernate.cache.use_second_level_cache">true</property>
<property name="hibernate.cache.region.factory_class">
    org.hibernate.cache.ehcache.EhCacheRegionFactory
</property>
```

Or in `application.properties`:

```properties
spring.jpa.properties.hibernate.cache.use_second_level_cache=true
spring.jpa.properties.hibernate.cache.region.factory_class=org.hibernate.cache.ehcache.EhCacheRegionFactory
```

### b. Enable Query Cache

Add the following property:

```xml
<property name="hibernate.cache.use_query_cache">true</property>
```

Or in `application.properties`:

```properties
spring.jpa.properties.hibernate.cache.use_query_cache=true
```

### c. Configure Cache Provider

You need to configure a cache provider like Ehcache or Hazelcast. For Ehcache, add the dependency and provide an `ehcache.xml` configuration file.

## 3. Using Query Cache in Code

To cache a query, you must mark it as cacheable:

```java
List<User> users = session.createQuery("from User")
    .setCacheable(true)
    .list();
```

Or with JPA:

```java
Query query = entityManager.createQuery("SELECT u FROM User u");
query.setHint("org.hibernate.cacheable", true);
List<User> users = query.getResultList();
```

## 4. Cache Regions

You can specify a cache region for a query:

```java
session.createQuery("from User")
    .setCacheable(true)
    .setCacheRegion("userRegion")
    .list();
```

## 5. Important Notes

- The query cache only caches the identifiers of the result set. The actual entity data must be cached in the second-level cache.
- If the underlying data changes, Hibernate will invalidate the cache.
- Use query cache for queries that are read-mostly and executed frequently.

## 6. Example Configuration

**ehcache.xml:**

```xml
<ehcache>
    <cache name="org.hibernate.cache.internal.StandardQueryCache"
           maxEntriesLocalHeap="1000"
           timeToLiveSeconds="600"/>
    <cache name="userRegion"
           maxEntriesLocalHeap="1000"
           timeToLiveSeconds="600"/>
</ehcache>
```

## 7. When to Use Query Cache

- For static or rarely changing data.
- For queries executed often with the same parameters.
- Not recommended for highly dynamic or transactional data.

## 8. Disabling Query Cache

To disable, set:

```properties
spring.jpa.properties.hibernate.cache.use_query_cache=false
```

or remove the property.

---

By enabling and properly configuring Hibernate's query cache, you can significantly improve the performance of your application for suitable use cases.
